Now as we get ready to move on with the course.

Before we begin, there's a couple of quick things I want to talk about.

All right.

Now, what I found is that a lot of people that come into one of these courses, they tend to think

they've got everything they need jumping into it, when in reality they might be missing a few bits

and pieces on concepts that maybe they've not picked up over the years or in previous courses they've

taken.

Uh, even my most expert, experienced students tend to be missing some bits and pieces.

So what I'm about to do with you in these next few lectures is we're going to do a foundation lecture.

We're going to talk about understanding things like on premise Active Directory, domain services.

We're going to talk about what RAR and DMZ and virtualization is.

We're going to talk about the Microsoft cloud services as a whole, including the ideas of Microsoft

365 and Azure and IaaS, PaaS and SaaS and what all of that stuff is.

And we're just going to make sure that we draw out a nice picture for you visually, so that you can

help understand what these concepts are.

Now, if you have taken some of my courses before, you may have already seen all of this, and you're

more than welcome just to skip over this, if you've already seen these types of concepts before, you

can skip through this, but this is going to definitely help you make sure you have a solid foundation.

Uh, before we move on.

All right.

Now, the other thing I want to mention is coming up to you're going to see some videos that say, do

not skip or don't skip.

And it's very important that you don't skip any videos that have that tag at the beginning of the name

of the video.

All right.

All right.

Well, with that said, let's go ahead and jump right into the foundation.

Now, if you're going to be working in any type of Microsoft administration services these days, there

are some fundamental principles that are very important that you understand.

So what I want to do is I want to get into some of the foundations of understanding things like Microsoft

domains, understanding some of the networking technologies raz and VPNs and virtualization.

And also we're going to talk about the cloud services and how all that fits into this.

But it's important to kind of start from the beginning so you can understand where things have been,

understand where things are going, and you have to consider the fact that, you know, we're the world

is transitioning now more into a cloud oriented environment.

But in the past, everything was managed on prem or on premise.

And we got to talk about this transition and how things were and how things are now and where Microsoft

is going.

So to start with, you know, we go back, go back in time to the 1950s, 1960s.

They had mainframes, these gigantic computers that would take up like entire rooms.

They used vacuum tubes.

And then as we moved into the 1970s, something miraculous happened.

They created what was known as an IC, an integrated circuit, which allowed basically binary math to

be processed through little chips.

And this is where personal computing became popular.

So in the 1980s, personal computers started coming out.

I'm going to draw this little symbol here to represent a computer.

And I tell you what, I'm going to create another little symbol here to kind of represent a bunch of

computers.

So in the 1980s, companies started buying PCs and personal computers, and they started showing up

in people's offices.

And eventually, you know, they were networking them together and all of that.

And so this is where things really get started.

Now, of course, in those days, one of the problems was we lived in what was called a peer to peer

network.

So what would happen is these computers were you could network these computers together with various

technologies.

But, um, there was no centralization, meaning each computer was equal.

There was no computer that controls all the other computers.

A network admin would have to if they wanted to make changes, they'd have to sit down at each and every

computer to make those changes or get users to help them, which was always a nightmare.

Um, and so that didn't, you know, it worked, but it didn't work very efficiently.

All right.

Now, as we moved into the 1990s, there was a company that kept that was gaining ground called Novell,

Novell.

And they had a product called NetWare, which was the idea of that was to use a server that would help

manage machines and also allow people to share files easier, whereas in a peer to peer network back

originally, these machines would have to share files with each other and people would have to know

each other's passwords.

It just didn't work very well.

Well, eventually, with the creation of the file server concept, you had a more powerful machine that

you could share files on and all that.

And eventually Novell even came out with the idea of a server that could manage other machines.

Now, this is kind of where Microsoft comes in.

Microsoft created their product called NT, and they created this concept of a domain controller, which

is a special type of server that can manage these other servers.

Now fast forward, they came out with what was known as a domain.

But fast forward to the year 2000.

Microsoft releases their newest domain technology and they call it uh.

Active Directory and Active Directory domains were represented by a triangle.

All right.

And a domain controller was a, a server essentially that had a database on it.

And that database was the Active Directory database.

So let's just kind of fix that here.

This little cylinder looking thing I'm going to make here is going to represent my Active Directory

database.

So add.

All right.

Um, and this is what we still call to this day.

We call it ads.

Active directory domain services.

And usually if you hear that firm, uh, Active Directory domain services, it means it's an on premise

domain.

So, anyway, um, you would always want to have more than one domain controller.

You the reason you want to have more than one domain controller is because the same reason you have

more than one of any type of server.

Really.

One reason being, um, to break up the disbursement of load, these machines will authenticate with

these domain controllers.

And the more machines you got, uh, you know, you don't want all of that just going to one domain

controller, right?

The other consideration is redundancy.

If you only have one and that server goes down, well, you're in trouble right.

So we want to have multiple.

The other thing about domain controllers that are interesting is that they replicate.

So for example let me make a I'm going to make a little smiley face guy here.

And this little smiley face guy is going to represent my user.

So we create a user account on a domain controller.

Now the interesting thing about user accounts, or the interesting thing really about domain controllers

is that they replicate.

So everything you do on one, uh, will replicate over to the other.

So if I create a user account on that first one, well, replication is going to occur between both

of them.

And so this little arrow thing I'm going to make here is going to represent replication.

So domain controllers replicate.

That means that this user could log on to any one of these thousand machine.

And it's going to, you know, authenticate with the domain controller.

Right.

The authentication protocol that is used is the protocol known as Kerberos.

All right.

Kerberos is the authentication protocol.

What is a protocol?

It's like a language basically.

Okay.

Uh, now there was an older protocol that, that, uh, that it also supported called Ntlm.

That was for legacy for older uh, prior to the year 2000 machines.

Now the um, that protocol allowed us to have encrypted passwords and all that and authenticate securely

and all that fun stuff.

The other thing is, is Active Directory uses a language, um, known as the Directory Service language,

and that language was called Ldap, Lightweight Directory Access Protocol.

Now all that is again, this is all decades old at this point.

Um, at the time when it came out, it was cutting edge.

But it is a bit dated nowadays, but it still works and it's still pretty secure.

Though there are some considerations on security that I'm not going to explain right now.

Now, the other thing that's important about Active Directory is that all machines have to have a name,

and the name must be, of course, associated with an IP address and, and all of that.

And so there is a service that we use that we use it on the internet all the time called DNS Domain

Name Service.

Our, our uh, domain must have a name.

Usually when you name your domain, you would name it after your company.

And a lot of people even name their domains based on their web presence.

So for example, my domain might be called exam lab practice.com.

That's my company, my web presence.

And um, I'm going to need to have a server in my domain that can associate the names and IP addresses

together.

So that server is called a DNS server, DNS Domain Name System server.

And that server will also have to have a little database on it.

And that database will be our DNS database okay.

So we'll just draw another little cylinder.

And what I'm going to do is I'm going to highlight this border with red.

And then I'm going to color code the database red, which means that this database is DNS database is

associated with that name.

Now what happens is our machines clients domain controllers.

We also might even have.

Let's draw a file server over here.

Pretty common that we have file servers in our environment.

Okay.

All of these machines would register with our DNS.

All right.

And this allows for the centralization of name resolution.

Meaning they register their IP addresses into this database.

And then now any time a machine needs to find another machine, it can query DNS.

So for example, these machines all have to authenticate by your domain controllers.

They can query DNS and say hey DNS, do you know what the address is of one of my domain controllers?

So I can authenticate and DNS can reply back and say, yeah, here is the information.

At that point the client can go and authenticate.

So it works very efficiently.

Now all of this together, this this idea of domain controllers, this triangle you see here, this

provides centralization.

So we moved away from peer to peer networking back in the day where, you know, every machine was kind

of its own boss and there was no centralized way of managing things to.

Now we are working in a centralized environment.

These domain controllers help us centralize this DNS service.

Help helps us centralize.

So we now have some central control over things.

One of the great things about our domain controllers, too, is we have these wonderful things called

gpos group Policy objects.

A group policy object is this object that you can create that has all these settings parameters, uh,

you know, any type of attribute you want to configure or change on machines.

You can do it through a GPO.

So for example, if your boss walks up to you and says, hey, I want you to, um, force the firewalls

to be turned on all these machines, I want to make sure that the antivirus is always up to date.

Uh, I want you to disable some of the wallpaper feature.

I don't want people you, uh, putting crazy wallpapers on their machine.

Um, so, I mean, you could.

The sky's the limit.

There are literally thousands of things you can do inside of a GPO, but what happens is that GPO can

instruct these machines to turn things on and turn things off.

Gpos also replicate.

So when you create a GPO on a domain controller, it replicates over to the other domain.

So it doesn't matter which machines you know, authenticate with which domain controller.

All right.

So these gpos can be deployed out to these machines.

And this is how you turn things on turn things off.

You could even deploy software with that if you wanted to.

So it was very very powerful.

Um, a very, very powerful system for managing everything.

All right.

Uh, of course, let's let's throw the internet into the mix here.

Let's say that this little cloud is going to represent the, uh, you know, the internet.

And let's talk about kind of a little bit about how that sort of fits into the picture.

Let me just clean it up here with the mighty stroke of my paintbrush, I will clean up the internet.

All right.

Um, all right.

So then we have the internet, right?

So maybe we've got an internet connection that's coming in here.

All right.

And of course, you don't want to just leave your internal network exposed.

So your company would generally have a firewall, right.

Um, and we would just put that firewall right here.

And so now we have, um, you know, a secure way for traffic to flow out to the internet.

And, uh, the only things that can come in would be things that we send out, and we could allow things

through that firewall if we want to.

Now, this is a traditional domain.

This is the way we've done things for 20 years.

All right.

Um, and in this next little section, I want to talk about, uh, expansion on all of this and where,

where things have gone with things like RAR and all that and VPN and virtualization.

So that'll wrap this little section up and we'll move on to the next.


And they want to talk about some concepts that are also sort of the foundation of how we've done things

over the years.

It's important to understand how we've done things over the years so we can understand how things are

now.

So looking back, we have an Active Directory domain aids.

It's called Active Directory Domain Services, which uses the Ldap Lightweight Directory Access Protocol,

which uses Kerberos authentication or for this older for the legacy.

Back in the 90s, devices that used in TLM new technology LAN manager which is an all very new these

days.

But even Kerberos is pretty old can considering you know, we've been using it for for decades.

And I think actually the protocol even came out back in the 1980s.

So, you know, we got some data technologies, but the technologies have been updated, a lot of them

over the years to be secure.

So you can still feel comfortable using those.

But let's talk about some different scenarios.

Now.

The first thing I want to look at is the scenario of what happens when we have a user who is not.

At the office.

So this person is working from home.

Working from home is a lot more popular nowadays than it has been in the past.

So it's very common.

And this person needs the ability perhaps to, you know, be able to connect in and access, uh, services

that are inside.

Okay.

Um, and we've got a file server, but, you know, ultimately we you probably are aware that, you

know, in the past, um, it was always this mindset of do it yourself, host your own server.

So, you know, your companies might have they might have a file server.

But then they might also have a, you know, they might be they might have a SQL database server that

that users need to access.

Let's let's create that SQL.

All right.

Um, maybe, uh, Microsoft Exchange.

That was email, right?

Microsoft Exchange was, uh, you know, used for email and then maybe even like SharePoint was very

popular by Microsoft on premise.

So here you've got these, you know, these four servers providing a service to our devices.

And um, you've got users working from home and everything else needing to get access to those.

Let me just kind of move those a little bit over here.

Make a little bit of room here, and I might shrink those down just a little bit as well.

All right.

So this user who is working from home needs to access these services.

But the person is not, uh, you know, not around.

Well, let me tell you what you shouldn't do.

You shouldn't just open up all the ports on the firewall and allow this person in to get access to these,

um, devices un securely.

In fact, in the 90s, a lot of companies did that.

The very first company I ever worked for, uh, back in the 90s, they didn't really have a firewall.

So you literally could share out your you had a public address and, uh, you could connect to it from

home.

It was really scary.

When I think about it, even in the 90s, that was scary.

But nowadays it's incredibly scary.

Why is it scary?

Because you got these people out there that want to do things that they shouldn't do and, you know,

get access to companies data and try to do damage and ransom and all of that ransomware and all that.

And who are these people?

Well, we we generally call them hackers, right.

So let me draw a little hacker this, uh, this little this little, uh, box here is going to represent

my hacker.

All right.

And.

Let's make him.

Let's make this hacker look like he's up to no good.

All right.

I'm just going to.

I'm going to give him, like, a let's give him like a devil horns, some devil horns here and maybe,

like, uh, you know, he's he's in a bad mood.

We'll give him a frowny face, give him some fangs, and maybe the fangs are dripping blood everywhere.

Okay.

No, I'm just kidding.

Sorry.

Sometimes I get carried away, all right, but, uh, anyway, that's going to be my hacker, all right.

Goofy looking little hacker person.

All right.

And, um, so we don't want this hacker, like, spying on my user.

We don't want this hacker getting access to resources inside.

So how do we get around that?

Well, usually the way we would do that is you would use a VPN, a virtual private network.

So the way you would do that is you could purchase what was called a VPN concentrator.

And basically it's a device that, um, allows secure connections in.

But in the Microsoft world, we actually had a type of server we could set up, uh, called a Raas server,

or also known as an Raas server because it stood for Routing and Remote Access services.

But, um, anyway, remote access services is the idea here.

And with that, we have support for VPN.

Now what does that do?

This allows this thing called a VPN tunnel to be created, which means that you have this encrypted

communications that goes through to that Raas server.

And then from there, that Raas server allows you to access other resources securely.

This hacker will not be able to see the the traffic that's flowing through because it's all encrypted.

The only thing the hacker would be able to see is that it was going up to this firewall, and that would

be it wouldn't be able to see what the traffic said.

So this is how we would we would definitely help secure things.

Now, the other thing that I want to talk to you about here is what happens when a company needs to

have a service that is exposed to the internet.

For example, let's say that your company is going to host their own web server.

Okay.

So you set up a web server.

All right.

Maybe this is going to be w-w-w dot exam lab practice.com or whatever.

And people from the internet need to be able to get to it anonymously.

Um, well, how are you going to do that?

Where are you going to put that web server?

Are you going to put it internally inside the domain like you see here?

And the reason that's scary is because you'd have to open up port 443, port 80, which is http, http

ports to allow traffic to get in.

Which means not only could you know somebody out there on the internet anonymously get into this web

server, but technically, so could a hacker.

And if a hacker was ever to gain access over this website by hacking it, then something called pivoting

could occur where a hacker could actually gain access to these other services that are on your network.

And so that's where things are really scary.

So you definitely wouldn't want to host it internally most of the time.

Although there was a way to do something called a reverse proxy.

I won't get into that right now, but we would probably want to put this outside, right?

So we want to put it out here.

Um, but there's something else that's a problem on that.

If you put it outside that firewall, you don't have to worry about, you know, people getting, you

know, allowing traffic to come in.

But the only that the scary thing about that is the fact that this poor web server is now completely

exposed to the internet.

So with no protection.

So the way around that usually is people would get another firewall.

So you'd have two firewalls.

This first firewall was would be called the internal connected firewall.

And then this firewall here would be called the external connected firewall.

Now this little network between that we would call that a DMZ demilitarized zone.

Or now the more popular terms is perimeter network.

Okay.

So DMZ perimeter network are basically the same thing.

All right.

Um, and so now what you would do is you'd only open you would only open the ports like port 8443,

53 for DNS.

If you put DNS in there, uh, whatever ports there that you need.

And now traffic would be able to get to this web server.

Okay.

Um, and so, uh, even if a hacker, you know, somehow hacks this web server, you're not going to

allow traffic to pass through this firewall and get to these resources.

The only traffic that you might allow would be VPN.

Okay.

Um, and there's a bunch of authentication and all that that has to happen to make that work.

All right.

So that's the idea of remote access and VPNs in a nutshell for you, as well as the concept of DMZ and

the perimeter network idea.

Now, the final thing I want to look at with you, um, in this video is the idea of virtualization.

So I talked about how in the past, uh, it was always the mindset was we got to host everything ourselves.

We got to have our own little data center.

We got to have our, you know, we got to have our own servers, file server, SQL exchange, SharePoint,

all that, and it's all got to be hosted by us.

And that's the way things have always been done.

All right.

Um, now, uh, then what you'll find is, is as time went on, a company called VMware came out with

a way of expanding on virtualization.

Just so you know, virtualization is not a new terme.

Virtualization has been around for a very long time.

In fact, the Terme hypervisor is the essentially the software that lets us emulate hardware.

And if you can emulate hardware, you can also store software on that emulated hardware.

That's the idea of virtualization.

Um, that Terme hypervisor has been around since the 1970s.

The idea of even mainframes dividing up processing time and doing shared computing was a form of virtualization.

So this is not a new concept, but VMware, they expanded on this idea and the I and the thing that

they did that really pushed the envelope on all this was that, hey, you don't necessarily need four

different servers.

And here's the other thing.

Here's the other crazy thing.

If you wanted redundancy for those four servers, you'd really need eight servers, right?

You could do clustering those together so you'd have eight servers to provide redundancy for those.

But with with virtualization I can set up a hypervisor server.

One server and an virtualize those other servers.

Now, in the Microsoft world we call that Hyper-V.

That is the the software that does this Hyper-V hyper hypervisor.

Uh, Microsoft is not the one that came up with that.

VMware is not the first ever come up with that.

VMware was the biggest contributor to this concept, though, so I do have to give them credit where

credit is due.

All right.

Now the other beautiful thing though about this is you get a really, really powerful machine.

You virtualize your, uh, machines on those.

You get these things called, um, checkpoints in Microsoft.

They used to be called snapshots.

And a lot of other companies still call them snapshots, where you can make changes without the worry

of breaking anything, because you can revert back to before the change was made.

The other thing that's wonderful about, um, using virtualization is if I want to have complete redundancy,

I don't have to have eight servers.

I could literally you know, purchase another server and have a copy of the virtual machines on that

other server.

Now I've only got two servers as opposed to having to have, uh, a total eight servers.

Okay.

So this is a very powerful feature capability that kind of started everything.

Another thing that we got, and this is kind of where you start thinking about cloud computing, is

with virtualization comes the firm elasticity, which basically means that each these machines can be

given a certain amount of Ram processing power.

But here's what's interesting about that.

If one of the servers isn't using all of the available Ram that it's been given, it can share it with

other servers.

So, for example, this file server has been given more Ram than it needs, and then SQL needs that

Ram.

The file server can give up some of that Ram over to SQL, and when SQL is done using that extra memory,

it can release it back to everybody.

It's basically a pool type scenario where it gets released into a pool of Ram and pool of CPU, and

they can grow and shrink as they need.

And that's the a small way of sort of, uh, on premise way of looking at elasticity.

Of course, when you get into cloud computing, you'll learn that that can expand across multiple machines,

across the, you know, the board in these big data centers.

But not to get into that just yet here, but that's the idea.

Hopefully that now helps you with understanding that concept of what virtualization is.

And with that is really where cloud computing started to come into play, which I'm not explaining in

this video, but hopefully now you have a much better understanding of the concept of of the RA VPN

as well the DMZ concepts and virtualization.

And now we'll in this next section, we'll start getting into the concept of cloud services.


So with the creation of virtualization, it got companies thinking.

Companies like Amazon and Google and Intel and IBM and eventually even Microsoft that, hey, we've

got these massive data centers.

Uh, why not allow people to pay us to host their virtual machines on our data center?

So in other words, we can get people to pay us money to host their virtual machines, and they don't

have to deal with all the headaches of dealing with everything on premise.

So this is really the idea of where cloud services came from.

And so I'm going to draw this kind of big cloud here.

This is going to represent cloud computing if you will.

And we'll have a connection coming down here okay.

And I will just kind of clean that up a little bit and make it somewhat look nice.

So this being, you know, the big, big thing is this is not a new concept of if you think about humans

as a whole, we have offered services for years.

I know how to change the oil in my car, but I don't necessarily enjoy doing it.

So I can pay a, uh, a mechanic shop, um, the, the fee, and they will do it for me as a service.

Right.

Well, this is the idea of cloud services.

So there's some acronyms I want to introduce you to, the first one being the worm IaaS.

And that is infrastructure as a service.

So infrastructure as a service means the cloud provider is offering their infrastructure for a fee as

a service.

Okay.

So the idea being something like this, instead of me having to host my virtual machines and all that

in my on premise environment, I can pay this cloud company to host virtual machines for me.

They can also host a virtual network for you.

They can host, they can have storage that's offered to you.

They can have firewalls, virtual firewalls that are associated on those virtual networks, and virtual

load balancers.

Okay.

They can have apps out there that are available.

They can have virtual databases that are hosted in the cloud.

So essentially just about anything you could imagine that you can host on premise can be hosted out

there in the cloud service.

Uh, now Amazon, Google, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, these various companies offer this Microsoft's

cloud service, uh, that does this.

Their their IaaS service is called Azure.

Now, let me just kind of clarify, you may pronounce that name, that word a little different than

I do Azure or Azure or Azure.

Actually, years ago when I was first learning Azure, I actually went to, uh, the internet and started

watching videos of the developers that created Azure and the first few developers that I watched.

That's how they pronounced it.

They pronounced it Azure.

So that's how I just assumed that it needed to be pronounced.

Of course, I learned later down the road that not all the developers even agree on how to pronounce

that word.

Some of them pronounced it Azure.

Azure, uh, Azure.

I've even heard somebody pronounce it Azure.

So this is one of those tomato tomato.

Pronounce that word any way you want to pronounce it.

That's how I say it, which is Azure.

Okay.

So Azure is Microsoft's official, um, inner infrastructure as a service.

And the way that it all works is you pay a fee for what you use every month, basically how much CPU,

memory, storage, network, all of that that you use.

That's what you're going to pay for.

Okay.

Now there are some other terms, uh, other acronyms that I want to introduce you to.

There is an acronym called PaaS, which stands for platform as a service and an acronym called SaaS,

which is software as a service.

Now the the the idea there being that there are well, we'll start with, uh, with software as a service

first software as a service.

The idea is that there is a fully functional app or application that is 100% ready for you to start

using, or your users to start using.

All you got to do is just jump right in and start using it.

Okay, so there are some, uh, Azure services that are software as a service.

There's also what are called platforms as a service.

Now, platform as a service is kind of a uh, there's a little bit more work involved from an admin

standpoint.

So a platform as a service means there is a some type of software platform that is available for you

to start using, and it's 100% ready for you to use, but you have to go and administer it and use it

before it's going to really do anything.

Uh, a good example of this is Microsoft's Directory services in the cloud is called intra ID.

Enter ID, all right, which I want to make.

It's very important that you realize that this was formerly called Azure AD, and there's still a lot

of documentation out there that refers to this as Azure AD.

So it's very important that that you are aware of that.

Now, you are taking my course right now, and you should realize that I have hundreds of hours of videos

that still me, that I've got to update that involve that terme Azure AD.

There are literally hundreds of hours that I have recorded using the Terme Azure AD, and I'm in the

process of updating videos, but be aware that I don't have them all upgraded.

So you may hear me refer in the course to stuff as Azure AD.

I actually have a video on this for you to watch after these foundation videos.

It's a video that says do not Skip, so please do not skip that video.

Make sure you watch that video because it's going to talk about this name change.

So anyway the name is now intro ID it's just a name change.

They changed it to Azure AD.

The services are pretty much all the same.

It's just a name change.

Okay, so intro ID is a platform as a service.

Now it is Microsoft's Directory Services.

This is where your user accounts and passwords and groups and permissions, role permissions and all

that are all managed through intro ID formerly Azure AD.

Okay.

Um, whereas on premise in a domain we called it Ads Active Directory Domain services.

All right.

I think that's part of the reason Microsoft changed the name to kind of distinguish the difference between

the on premise, uh, Active Directory and the former Active Directory Azure AD to intro ID.

Anyway, um, this platform as a service is ready for you to use, but there's only like one user and

that's the admin.

And then you're responsible for going in there as an admin and adding users and controlling things.

That's why it's a platform.

As a service, it's not 100%, uh, set up.

You have to administer it.

Now.

Microsoft's main, uh, platform as a service, uh, functions and software as a service.

They have something called Microsoft 365.

So there's really two parts to the Microsoft Cloud service.

There's Azure, uh, which is mostly focused on the IaaS side of things.

And don't get me wrong, in Azure, there are also some platform as a services and software and services,

but it's mostly geared towards IaaS.

Whereas Microsoft 365 is mostly geared towards platform as a service.

Now these two are very related.

Microsoft 365 sits on top of Azure.

You can't have Microsoft 365 without Azure.

And if you create an Azure account, then it'll allow you to automatically create a Microsoft 365 account.

So these are all related.

You're not just going to create an Azure account, or you're not just going to create a Microsoft 365

account.

They're pretty much linked together.

Okay.

Now in the Microsoft 365 services, you have lots of platform as a services and software as a service.

For example, uh, we have the what are called the Microsoft 365 apps for enterprise, which that was

formerly called office 365.

And that's the downloadable version of the the Microsoft 365 apps, formerly the office 365 apps like

word, Excel, PowerPoint, all of that.

And there is also something called office for the web.

Now that is fully a software as a service.

The, uh, the Microsoft 365 apps for enterprise, that is actually a mix.

It's a platform as a service and a software as a service.

Most people will refer to it as a software as a service because they're downloadable apps.

But as an admin, from an admin standpoint, we have to administer that.

So the administration side of it is platform as a service.

Uh, office for the web is 100% software as a service.

These are web based versions of the office apps that are ready for you, for your users to use.

They get once they get a license, they can use it.

Okay.

Then we have exchange online.

Okay.

So the administration side of that is a platform as a service.

But the user side of that is a software as a service.

Right.

And then we've got SharePoint online which is the same idea.

It's a you know, admin side is a platform as a service.

But the user side, which is what most everybody focuses on, is a, uh, software as a service.

We have Microsoft Teams.

Same thing for that.

Okay.

Um, you know, for, for messaging and all of that fun stuff.

We have, uh, a product called Intune, which is an incredibly powerful product, uh, mobile device

management, mobile application management.

Intune is what is sort of taking the place of gpos in the cloud.

So on premise, we can control the settings and parameters and attributes, and we can deploy software

and all that using.

Gpos on premise.

Well, now, when it comes to the cloud service, we can use Intune.

We can actually control on premise machines from Intune.

So it is very, very powerful and incredibly powerful product.

Then we've got we've got OneDrive for business.

OneDrive for business is a cloud based storage that users can have access to.

So anyway, there there's actually so many products that are cloud based products.

There's no way I could put them all in here.

But here's some of the main, you know, main things.

Now as far as the licensing and all of that with Azure, you are paying for what you use CPU, Ram,

storage and network.

But for the Microsoft 365 services, you have what are called subscriptions, and you purchase a subscription

with a certain amount of licenses.

So for example, if I purchase a Microsoft 365 subscription, I can purchase a certain amount of licenses

and I can issue those out to my users, and I will pay a monthly fee for however many licenses that

I've got with my subscription.

Okay.

And that's just giving you a basic understanding of how that works.

Exactly.

Okay, so ultimately, though, if I could kind of color code this, we'll say that, you know, the,

the Azure side of this IaaS.

And again, Azure does have some platform as a service stuff as well as software as a service, but

it's mostly geared to be a I, a infrastructure service.

And then the, uh, Microsoft 365 is mostly platform as a service, software as a service.

So if I was to kind of draw a, you know, kind of just draw around these, we would say that the these

right here are all geared towards Microsoft 365.

And then this, these are geared towards the infrastructure service which is Azure.

And both of these Azure and Microsoft 365.

They share intro ID they share intro ID okay.

Yellow or red and blue make purple.

Right?

Okay.

So they actually, um, you create users in the Azure side or the Microsoft 365 side, you're going

to see the same users because they are linked together.

They share the same directory service.

So it's important to understand that.

Now the other piece of this is what about situations where you want to link all this together.

So it's not uncommon nowadays for companies, you know, to have this triangle, to have this, uh,

on premise domain and then also start utilizing Microsoft's cloud services.

Um, and then, you know, in the for years and years, they've always pushed this thing called so so

is single sign on where you have a user has a user account, and that user account gives them access

to everything they need.

Well we don't get.

So if you have to have a user account to access things in your domain and then a different user to access

things in the cloud, right.

Well, Microsoft has ways around that.

They actually have, uh, services that you can use for linking these together and that service.

Let me just kind of move some of this around a little bit so I can make a little bit more room.

We'll put the DNS server there.

We'll move this little raz server down over here.

And the server is called intra.

Microsoft Interconnect and it was formerly formerly Azure AD connect.

Okay.

So the so again it's called intra Connect now.

And it used to be called Azure AD connect.

And I'm definitely I like to refer to it with the old name as well.

Just because be advised you really kind of need to know the old name as well, because there's still

a lot of documentation that will refer to this as the older name.

The newer names interconnect.

The the older name is is Azure AD connect.

But this was a server you could set up on premise.

And what it would do is it'll synchronize your user accounts out to the cloud.

So your on premise user accounts would get synchronized.

So whatever users you have on premise and you don't have to synchronize them all, you could pick and

choose which ones you synchronize, but your user accounts are going to sync out to intra ID.

And now what will happen is you have this thing called seamless.

So where when your users log on to the domain, it logs them on in both places, they log on to the

on premise domain as well as in the cloud, which is really, really cool.

Now that is a heavier weight version.

There is actually a a lighter weight version that's a very, very lightweight application.

You don't actually have to dedicate a server to it like they kind of want you to with interconnect.

There is actually another lighter weight tool called intra sync or intra ID sync, which is a lighter

weight.

Now there's some pluses and minuses to go in either route, which I'm not going to get into right now,

but the the traditional way to do this was to use this here interconnect formally Azure ad connect.

Now, the other thing I'll tell you is this does not sync back.

So it would sync users out, but it won't sync users that are created out in the cloud.

Back to on premise.

You cannot currently do that.

You can't synchronize users that are created in intra ID down here, but any users can be synced out

and it'll even make it where if they change their password, like out in the cloud, it'll it'll sync

that as well.

So anyway, that kind of gives you a rundown of that.

Now I'll also tell you that Microsoft is moving away from domains.

In fact, if you, um, if if you've got an on premise domain like, like what you see here, then yeah,

it's a great idea to utilize this.

But if you're a new company and this really pains me to say it because I have, um, fed my family for

over two decades by by not only teaching about Active Directory on premise, but also implementing Active

Directory on premise as a consultant.

Um, and so it kind of pains me to say this, but as a consultant now, I'm not even recommending that

newer companies implement a domain anymore.

Um, a lot of companies are now moving to the cloud and there's ups and downs of that.

But to be honest with you, in most cases your a company gets out cheaper by utilizing cloud services.

Okay.

Um, and so nowadays you can actually set up on premise machines and manage them through Intune and

things like that that are in the cloud.

You can even have client machines hosted in the cloud.

But I'm not going to dive into that right now.

Uh, ultimately, though, if you are a company that's been around for a while, then the traditional

approach that you see here where you've got a domain, um, and then you're starting to move into the

cloud, you can set up interconnect formerly Azure AD connect uh, or intra ID sync and which is the

lighter weight version.

And you can have things synchronized out to the cloud.

All right.

All right.

Well hopefully these foundation videos have been instructed instructional to you.

I hope you got a lot out of this and you're ready to move on.